---
title: "VTT Icons and Resources"
date: 2024-03-04T13:44:48Z
draft: false
featured_image: "/images/vtt-icons.webp"
tags: ['GM Help']
---

As we spoke about before, Covid really threw our lives when it came to game into some strangeness. We had to spin up new methods of keeping our stories alive. Though this is my least favorite of the ways to run a game. It holds itself aloft as something that can bring people together from across the world to enjoy the stories of friends who cannot gather around a table. Though in a more modern adaptation. Some have even begun to bring digital tables to their play groups. To this end I wanted to talk about digital assets and where to find them. 

For the Matrix, I've decided to try my own hand at making some. Given I am no digital artist, my wife however is. I've made some templates and with her help cleaning up some of the assets I had generated by AI assistance, I made some tokens I am pretty happy with. My deepest desire is to hope that these can be used with my matrix tools in order to make a truly inspiring map for play in Shadowrun. If you DO pull this off, please let me know. I will make my whole year.


These icons are zipped and can be found here: [IC And Other Icons](/files/IC_Icons.zip)


Another question always becomes, how on earth can I put together a "map of the city" without spending a lot of time? A suggestion that came up on the Pink Fohawk Discord led to this amazing insight. Grand Theft Auto 1. It has a great map that is over head and in larger pulled back views. It has tons of vehicles that fit on that map and those assets have sliced out for Wiki formatting. This is a great resource for something very quick.

- [Maps for GTA](https://mapgenie.io/grand-theft-auto)
- [Icons For Vehicles](https://www.grandtheftwiki.com/Vehicles_in_GTA_1)

Finally, you will want tokens to go on your map for various PC and NPCs. Well, Imgur's [The Third Joe](https://imgur.com/user/thethirdjoe) and [ThisIsWildDog](https://forums.shadowruntabletop.com/index.php?topic=24989.0) has your back. He's made and collected a dragon's horde worth of VTT icons. This should keep your games going for years to come! 
You can find them here: 
- [Character and NPC Icons](https://imgur.com/a/Q8ESI)

As always, if you find this helpful and you end up using some of them, shoot me an email and let me know. I'd love to know this is still helping people and that games are continuing to be played. Tell those stories my friends. They are a treasure few will ever hold.

-D (Dean 'at' nullsheen.com)